Geometric Path Planning for Automatic
Parallel Parking in Tiny Spots
H el ene VorobievaS ebastien Glaser
Nicoleta Minoiu-EnacheSa d Mammar
Renault, 1 avenue du Golf, 78288 Guyancourt, France (e-mail:
helene.vorobieva@renault.com, nicoleta.minoiu-enache@renault.com)
IFSTTAR, LIVIC, 14 route de la Mini ere, B^ atiment 824, Satory,
78000 Versailles, France (e-mail: sebastien.glaser@ifsttar.fr)
IBISC, Universit e d'Evry Val d'Essonne, 91025 Evry, (e-mail:
said.mammar@ifsttar.fr)
Abstract: This paper deals with path planning for car-like vehicle in parallel parking problems.
Our path planning method uses simple geometry of the vehicle kinematic model. The presented
strategy consists in retrieving the vehicle from the parking spot and reversing the obtained path
to park the vehicle. Two methods for parking in tiny spaces, where parking in one trial is not
possible, are proposed. In these cases, the number of needed trials to park the vehicle can be
calculated from a simple formula or from an iterative algorithm. The proposed planning methods
are independent of the initial position and the orientation of the vehicle. Reference trajectories
are generated so that the vehicle can park by following them. Simulations are provided for both
methods.
Keywords: Automatic Parking System, Trajectory Planning, Path Planning, Parallel Parking,
Geometric Approaches, Autonomous vehicles.
1. INTRODUCTION
Since parking spots have become very narrow in big
cities, drivers need to be experimented and very attentive
when maneuvering the vehicle. This often leads to minor
scratches on the car and increases trac jam by multiple
repositioning. Therefore, automatic parking is a solution
to reduce stress and increase comfort and security of the
driver. Here we consider parallel parking problem, which
is particularly demanding for the driver.
There are many methods to tackle the trajectory genera-
tion for the parking problem:
- Methods based on the use of reference functions. Lee
et al. (1999) present a method using Lyapunov function to
stabilize the vehicle to a line corresponding to the parking
spot. Paromtchik et al. (1997) propose the optimization of
two values to nd steering angles and durations of com-
mands to execute the parking maneuvers. These methods
strongly depend on gains and parameters chosen for the
functions, which can be dicult to adjust and not certainly
leads to correct parking maneuvers.
- Methods based on fuzzy logic (for exemple Zhao and
Collins (2005)) or neural network (for example Jenkins
and Yuhas (1993)) to learn human technique. They are
limited to human experts knowledge and are dicult to
generalize.
- Methods based on two phases path planning, for example
Jacobs et al. (1991) and Laumond et al. (1994): creation
of collision-free path by a lower-level geometric planner
that ignores the motion constraints and subdivisions ofthis path to create an admissible path. An optimization
routine can reduce the length of the path.
- Geometric methods based on admissible collision-free
circular arcs, which lead the vehicle in the parking spot in
one trial (Lo et al. (2003), Gupta and Divekar (2010), Choi
et al. (2011)). The trajectories created with these methods
involve easy geometrical equations. Whereas in the method
proposed by Gupta and Divekar (2010) the minimum
parking spot depends on the initial position of the vehicle,
Lo et al. (2003) and Choi et al. (2011) propose a minimal
parking spot, which only depends on the characteristics
of the vehicle. These methods propose only parking in
one trial (without longitudinal velocity sign changing);
possible only if the parking spot is suciently long.
Here a geometric approach is considered based on re-
trieving a vehicle from parking spot and reversing this
procedure to solve the parking problem (Lo et al. (2003),
Choi et al. (2011)). If the vehicle is parked and the parking
spot is long enough to retrieving in one trial, a human
driver steers the front wheel to maximum angle toward
the outside of the parking spot and moves forward until
the vehicle is retrieved. Then, he steers on the opposite
side to position correctly the vehicle along the road. This
procedure being reversible, we apply it in parallel parking
problem to form a simple path composed by two circles
connected by a tangent point.
Whereas in Lo et al. (2003) and Choi et al. (2011)
the authors proposed two identical circles, here only the
circle with the minimum radius for the second part of
the maneuver is retained. This allows to have vehicles13th IFAC Symposium on Control in Transportation Systems
The International Federation of Automatic Control
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
978-3-902823-13-7/12/$20.00 © 2012 IFAC 36 10.3182/20120912-3-BG-2031.00008
with a dierent maximal steering angle for the right
direction than for the left direction. At the beginning of the
maneuver, this also avoids steering at zero speed until the
maximum steering angle is reached, which is demanding
to the electric machine of the steering column.
In Choi et al. (2011), the initial position of the vehicle has
to be parallel to the parking spot, on a minimum circle
path. In the present solution, if the vehicle is suciently
far from the spot, its initial position can be everywhere,
with any orientation. In consequence, a new path can be
calculated at every moment of the maneuver if the real
position of the vehicle diers with respect to the planned
path. Two generalizations are also proposed to park the
vehicle in several trials when the parking spot is not
long enough to park the vehicle in one trial. The parking
maneuvers are presented assuming that the width of the
parking is at least equal to the width of the vehicle. The
study concerns the parking on the right side, but it can be
easily generalized for the left side parking.
Reeds and Shepp (1990) showed that optimal paths for
a vehicle going forwards and backwards can be obtained
with circles of minimal radius. In consenquece, this paper
puts forward paths constituated when possible by arcs of
circle of minimal admissible radius.
In the next section, the path planning in one trial is
depicted. Sections 3 and 4 are devoted to the generalization
for parking in several trials. In section 5, the dierences
between these two generalization methods are discussed.
In section 6, the generation of reference trajectories is
outlined. Finally, section 7 contains the conclusion.
2. PATH PLANNING IN ONE TRIAL
2.1 Model of the vehicle
In this paper front wheels steering vehicles are studied.
The model chosen for simulations is the Renault Fluence
ZE. Table 1, Table 2, Fig. 1, and Fig. 2 show the notations
and the values used here. The vehicle is represented by
its bounding rectangle, including the outside rear-view
mirrors. The front track is approximated to have the same
length as the rear track.
Table 1. Model of used vehicle
Parameters Notation Value
Wheelbase a 2701 mm
Track 2b 1537 mm
Front overhang dfront 908 mm
Rear overhang drear 1114 mm
Distance from the left, right wheel
to the left, right side of the vehicle
(exterior mirrors folded) dl,dr 136 mm
Maximum left, right steering angle lmax ,rmax 38 degree
2.2 Geometric properties
The parking maneuver is a low-speed movement. Conse-
quently the Ackerman steering is considered with the four
wheels rolling without slipping, around the instantaneous
center of rotation. Dierent turning radius are calculated.
ψδ
dreardfront
a
2b
drdl
xyFig. 1. Vehicle in global ( x;y; )-coordinates
δlCl
F
l
LGA BD EJRDl
REl
Fig. 2. Vehicle in a parking spot
With E and D being respectively the center of the rear
and the front track, it yields:
RE=a=tan ; RD=a=sin (1)
For example, to have REl, we takel. Minimum radius
is obtained with the maximum steering angle. With B,
A, J being respectively the right front, the right rear
and the left rear extremities of the vehicle, applying the
Pythagorean Theorem it results:
RBl=q
(REl+b+dr)2+ (a+dfront )2
RAr=p
(REr+b+dl)2+d2rear
RJr=p
(REr b dr)2+d2rear(2)
2.3 Strategy
To park the vehicle in one trial, the problem is taken in
the reversed way by retrieving the vehicle from the parking
spot like in Lo et al. (2003) and Choi et al. (2011). A trial
or a maneuver is dened as a sequence without velocity
sign changing. It is assumed that the parking space is long
enough for the one trial parking and that the distance
between the rear vehicle and the used vehicle, when it is
Table 2. Notations
Meaning Notation
Distance between 2 points (ex: A, B) dAB
Circle of center C and radius R C(C;R)
Left, right instantaneous center of rotation Cl,Cr
Distance between a point (ex: A) and Cl,CrRAl,RAr
Length of the parking spot L
Absolute value of the steering angle (right, left) (r,l)
Orientation of the vehicle  CTS 2012
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
37
Cl
F
A BDEE
CrRElmin
REinitrREinitrdClEinit
RElminαψ
ψδrinitial position 
final positionD
ABinit
JJFig. 3. Strategy for parallel parking in one trial
parked, is small. In these conditions, to exit the parking
spot, a human driver steers the front wheels to maximum
angle toward the outside of the parking spot and moves
forward until the vehicle is retrieved. This creates a path
in two arcs of circle, connected by a tangential point. Choi
et al. (2011) propose to take all both circles of minimum
radius. This means, that at the beginning of the maneuver
the car has to be perfectly positioned and parallel to the
parking spot.
One of the objectives in this study is to allow the vehicle
any initial position and orientation and to give it the possi-
bility to calculate a new maneuver at any moment without
need to replace itself at initial position, for instance if the
path of the vehicle diers from the calculated one. For
that, the second arc of circle (of the retrieving) must have
the possibility to be of higher radius than the minimal
radius. See Fig. 3 for visualization of one trial path and its
concerned values.
The rst arc of circle (which is the second in the parking
maneuver) is of minimum radius, but the second has to
connect the rst circle with the real initial point of the
car. As the rst arc of circle is of minimum radius and as
the position where the car has to park is known, Cland
RElmincan be deduced. During this arc of circle, the point
E goes all over C(Cl;RElmin ). For the second arc of circle,
we search C(Cr;REinitr), which allows E to go from its
initial position to C(Cl;RElmin).
AsCland the initial position of E are known, dClEinitis
calculated. Having the initial orientation of the vehicle, the
angle=dClEinitCris deduced from: dClCr=RElmin+
REinitrand from the lines ( EinitCr) and (EinitD) beeing
penpedicular. Applying the Al-Kashi Theorem to the
triangleEinitCrCl(see Fig. 3) it yields:
REinitr=d2
ClEinit R2
Elmin
2RElmin+ 2dEinitClcos(3)
r= arctan (a=REinitr) (4)
2.4 Conditions for feasability
The one trial parking without collision is possible under
two conditions: the length of the parking has to be bigger
than a minimal length and the circle C(Cr;REinitr) has to
be admissible for the vehicle.
y (mm) y (mm)
x (mm) x (mm)Fig. 4. Simulations of parking in 1 trial with dierent
initial orientations of the vehicle
Like in Choi et al. (2011) the minimal length is:
Lmin=drear+q
R2
Blmin (a=(tanl) b dl)2(5)
Until the end of the section, E=Einitis taken. This
means, that the vehicle is considered at the start position.
ForC(Cr;REr) being admissible, RErRErminis neces-
sary. Taking REr=RErmin, the circle is admissible when
dECldEClmin. From (3) it is deduced:
dEClmin=RErmincos+p
(RErmincos)2+RElmin+ 2RErminRElmin(6)
IfdECl< dEClminthe vehicle has to move forward until
dECldEClmin.
2.5 Simulation
Simulation on Matlab were performed with the cinematic
vehicle model with the parameters indicated in section
2.1. With this model the minimal length of the parking is
6320 mm. The Fig. 4 shows two simulations with dierent
initial orientations. It can be noticed, that the second arc
of circle of the path belongs to the same circle in both
cases. Only the length of these arcs of circle diers. In
these simulations the initial position of the vehicle is not
parallel to the parking spot, in consequence these results
cannot be obtained with the method of Choi et al. (2011).
3. PARKING IN N PARALLEL TRIALS
When the length of the parking spot is smaller than Lmin,
but still bigger than the length of the vehicle, it is possible
to park the vehicle in several trials. One solution is to go to
the nearest parallel position from the parking spot using
the one trial method. Then the vehicle executes series of
forward and backward moves to park in the spot. At the
end of each of these moves, the vehicle has to be parallel
to the spot.
3.1 Position at the end of the rst trial
During the rst trial, the vehicle parks in the nearest
parallel position to the parking spot. This means that for
the second arc of circle of the parking maneuver we have
dClBparallel =dClF=RBlmin. Having this arc of circle, the
rst one is calculated like in section 2. However, to know
the second arc of circle, the nearest parallel position has
to be calculated, dened by the distance d between the
parking spot and the vehicle in nearest parallel position
(see Fig. 5 for visualization of the vehicle in the nearest
parallel position).CTS 2012
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
38
Cl
F
A BD E
LldJ
GFig. 5. Vehicle at the nearest parallel position to the
parking spot after the rst trial
FE
LldEl
RECl
CrRE
l/2
ΔΔ/2RE
REJ
Gbeginning of forward move
end of forward move
Fig. 6. Forward move during parking in n parallel trials
Calculation of d:
If the vehicle was parked in the spot and it tried to retrieve
with maximum steering angle, there would have be the
pointF1: intersection of the circle C(Cl;RBlmin ) and the
linex=xF(see Fig. 5 and Fig. 8). In these conditions, yF1
can be easily calculated. Then d is deduced: d=yF yF1.
3.2 Number of trials
During the series of forward and backward moves, the
vehicle covers longitudinally the available distance l, where
l=L (a+dfront +drear). During the rst l/2 distance,
the steering is to left, and during the second l/2 distance,
the steering is to right (see Fig. 6). To be always parallel to
the parking spot at the end of each move and to maximize
lateral displacement, left and right steering angles must be
maximal and equal: =min(lmax;rmax).RE=a=tan
is deduced. The lateral displacement during a forward or
backward move is:
 = 2
RE q
R2
E l2=4
(7)
The total number of trials is deduced (rst trial plus series
of forward and backward moves):
nbtrials =IntegerPart (d=) + 2 (8)
Fig. 7. Simulation of parking in 5 trials by parallel method
3.3 Simulation
Simulation on Matlab was performed with the same model
as in section 2.5. The Fig. 7 shows a case with parking in
5 trials.
4. PARKING IN N OPTIMAL TRIALS
To nd the parking path with fewest maneuvers, the
retrieving path like a human driver would do is searched
and then reversed. The retrieving by a human is composed
by forward and backward moves until the vehicle can
retrieve. A forward move is steering to maximum angle
toward left and moving forward until approaching the front
obstacle. A backward move is steering to maximum angle
toward right and moving backward until approaching the
rear or lateral obstacle. When a forward move allows the
vehicle to retrieve without collision, the concerned arc of
circle is considered, which will be the second arc of circle
of the parking path. Then, the feasible arc of circle is
searched, which connects by a tangential point the real
initial position of the vehicle to the second arc of circle.
4.1 Algorithm for all trials except for the rst one
Here is dened the algorithm, which nds the arcs of circle
for forward and backward moves, excluding the rst trial,
by retrieving the vehicle. The rst and second arcs of
circle composing the rst trial are determined in the next
section.
(1) The last position of the vehicle when it is parked is
known: it is the goal position. Cl,Cr,RBlmin,RBrmin
for this position are calculated (see Fig. 8).
(2) IfRBlmindClFgo to (3), else go to (4).
(3) The vehicle can now retrieve in one trial. Having
currentCl, the method detailed in next section is
applied to nd the path of the rst trial.
(4) It is not possible to retrieve in one trial. The vehicle
moves forward with maximum left steering angle.
The created arc of circle C(Cl;RBlmin) cross the line
x=xFto a pointF1(see Fig. 8). At the end of this
arc of circle, the point B of the vehicle is in F1.
(5) Having Cl,F1, and B before step (4), the rotation
anglelis deduced.
(6)Cris the instantaneous center of rotation during the
maximum steering; consequently, it can be considered
that it belongs to the vehicle. When the vehicle moves
along the arc of circle determined in steps (4) and (5),
all points of the vehicle, including Cr, are transformed
by the rotation of center Cland anglel:
8(x;y)2vehicle (9)CTS 2012
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
39
Cl
F
A BE
GF1
CrRBrRBlθl
J
xyFig. 8. Vehicle moving forward with maximum left steering
angle
Cl
F
GF1
CrAE
G1
θrAθl
J
G2
θrJ
xy
Fig. 9. Vehicle moving backward with maximum right
steering angle

xnew
ynew
=Cl+
cosl sinl
sinlcosl

x
y
 Cl
From now on, only points after this rotation are
considered.
(7) The vehicle moves backward with maximum right
steering angle. The created arc of circle C(Cr;RArmin)
crosses the line y=yGto a point G1(see Fig. 9).
Moreover, the created arc of circle C(Cr;RJrmin)
crosses the line x=xGto a pointG2.
(8) Having current Cr, A, J, and calculated G1andG2,
the rotation angles rAandrJare deduced.
(9) The vehicle must move backward as far as possible,
but without collision. Consequently, it must stop
when J is in G2or when A is in G1. The corresponding
arc of circle is dened by r=min(rA;rJ).
(10)Clis the instantaneous center of rotation during
the left maximum steering; consequently, it can be
considered that it belongs to the vehicle. When the
Cl
F
ABD
EHEinit
CrRElmin
REinitrREinitrdClEinit
RElminαψ
ψδrinitial position
position at the end of the second arc of circleD
AB
GG2J
θrθlFig. 10. The two arcs of circle of the rst trial during
parking in n optimal trials
vehicle moves along the arc of circle determined in
steps (7), (8), and (9), all the points of the vehicle,
includingCl, are transformed by the rotation of center
Crand angler:
8(x;y)2vehicle (10)

xnew
ynew
=Cr+
cosr sinr
sinrcosr

x
y
 Cr
From now on, only points after this rotation are
considered.
(11) NewdClFis calculated and then go to step (2).
4.2 First trial
At the end of the algorithm above, the current step is the
step (3) and current position of the vehicle, including Cl,
is known. This is the position, in which the vehicle will be
at the end of the rst trial (after the two arcs of circle of
the rst trial) in maneuver of entering the parking spot.
This means that during the second arc of circle, the
point E goes all over C(Cl;RElmin). Like in section 2,
C(Cr;REinitr), which allows E to go from its initial po-
sition to C(Cl;RElmin), is searched (see Fig. 10).
Like in section 2, dClEinit, angle=dClEinitCrare
calculated and then by applying the Al-Kashi Theorem,
REinitr(3) and corresponding r(4) are obtained.
Remark about the feasibility:
The condition of non-collision with the already parked
vehicles is satised by positioning the vehicle on a non-
collision path during the algorithm detailed in the previous
section. The condition of feasibility of the rst arc of circle
is the same as in section 2.
The rotation angles randlfor the two arcs of circle of
the rst trial could be determined as follows:
As the initial positions of Cr,Cland E and their positions
at the end of the second arc of circle are known (Fig. 10),
the angles r=dEinitCrClandl=dEClCrfor the rst
and second arc of circle are deduced.CTS 2012
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
40
y (mm)
x (mm)Fig. 11. Simulation of parking in 3 trials by otimal algo-
rithm
4.3 Simulation
Simulation on Matlab was performed with the same model
as in section 2.5. The Fig. 11 shows a case with parking in
3 trials.
5. DISCUSSION
Sections 3 and 4 presented two methods for parallel
parking in n trials, when parking in one trial is not
possible.
The method in n parallel trials is very simple to implement
and the number of trials is easily calculated from the
geometry of the vehicle and of the parking spot. Never-
theless, the condition of displacement with beginning and
end of each move being parallel to the parking spot is very
restraining: the total number of trials increases very fast
when L decreases (see Table 3), what can be unsatisfactory
if a passenger or a driver is present in the vehicle.
The method in n optimal trials is instinctive, when revers-
ing the human retrieving maneuver. With this method, the
number of trials can be calculated only from an iterative al-
gorithm. Geometric transformations and formulas involved
in the algorithm are more complex in comparison with
the method in n parallel trials. It is not easy to visualize
for a human which trajectory the vehicle will generate.
Nevertheless the number of trials implied in this method is
much less considerable than in the method with n parallel
trials (see Table 3 for comparison of these methods using
model of the section 2.1 for a spot of standard width 2,5
m). In consequence, this method is to be used in priority
with passengers on board or to reduce the time of the
parking maneuver.
Table 3. Comparison between the two methods
in several trials
Length of the spot (cm) 617 616 597 575 567 543
Parallel method (trials) 1 3 5 11 14 32
Optimal method (trials) 1 3 3 3 5 7
6. GENERATION OF REFERENCE TRAJECTORIES
To make the vehicle follow the generated path, time control
commands of the steering angle and longitudinal velocity
v need to be built. As each path presented in this paper
can be divided in arcs of circle, a general control approach
used for each arc of circle is presented.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600−40−2002040
time (s)steering angle (degree)
0 100 200 300 400 500 600−1000−50005001000
time (s)longitudinal velocity (mm/s)Fig. 12. Simulation of control commands for the parking
in 3 optimal trials
Each arc of circle is dened by a radius R and an angle
. The control commands are generated for the middle of
front track, in consequence each radius concerned in the
arcs of circles can be calculated by R=a=sin.
For each arc of circle of the path, the used andhave
been presented in sections 3 and 4. In consequence, known
for each arc of circle and the length of each arc of circle
larc=Rare deduced.
To generate longitudinal velocity, the same method as in
Choi et al. (2011) is used. The needed time to reach a
desired maximal velocity or to reach null velocity from the
maximal velocity vmaxist1=vmax=des, wheredesis the
desired acceleration for the parking maneuver. During t1,
the vehicle goes over the distance d1=dest2
1=2. Then,
the vehicle stays at constant speed vmaxduring the time
t2= (larc 2d1)=vmax.
The control commands are:
8t2(0;2t1+t2)
(t) =kknownt2[0;2t1+t2] (11)
v(t) =(kvdest t2[0;t1]
kvvmaxt2[t1;t1+t2]
 kvdest t2[t1+t2;2t1+t2](12)
wherek=1 corresponds to a left (+1) or right steering
(-1),kv=1 corresponds to forward (+1) or backward
(-1) motion. A simulated example is shown in Fig. 12.
These commands are open-loop in the ( x;y; )-coordinates.
The steering column and the engine are controlled to
execute these commands to provide the desired path and
orientation of the vehicle. Possible errors can be compen-
sated by recalculating the geometric path at any moment.
7. CONCLUSION
Easy geometric path planning for parallel parking was
proposed. Two methods for the parking in several trials,
when the parking in one trial is not possible, were desribed.
The methods are independent of initial position and ori-
entation of the vehicle. The parking is possible as long as
the length of the parking spot is longer than the length
of the vehicle. The methods allow to generate a new path,CTS 2012
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
41
without replacing the vehicle at any initial position, if the
path of the vehicle diers from the rstly generated one.
Simulations were performed and in future, these methods
will be tested on real vehicles. The methods will be
generalized for the forward parallel parking and for the
other parking congurations.
REFERENCES
Choi, S., Boussard, C., and d'Andrea Novel, B. (2011).
Easy path planning and robust control for automatic
parallel parking. In Proc. of the 18th IFAC World
Congress . Milano, Italy.
Gupta, A. and Divekar, R. (2010). Autonomous parallel
parking methodology for Ackerman congured vehicles.
InProc. of Int. Conf. on Control, Communication and
Power Engineering . Chennai, India.
Jacobs, P., Laumond, J.P., and Taix, M. (1991). Ecient
motion planners for nonholonomic mobile robots. In
Proc. of IEEE/RJS Int. Work. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems . Osaka, Japan.
Jenkins, R.E. and Yuhas, H.P. (1993). A simplied neural
network solution through problem decomposition: the
case of the truck backer-upper. IEEE Trans. on Neural
Network , 4(4).
Laumond, J.P., Jacobs, P.E., Taix, M., and Murray, R.M.
(1994). A motion planner for nonholonomic mobile
robots. IEEE Trans. on Robotics and Automation ,
10(5).
Lee, S., Kim, M., Youm, Y., and Chung, W. (1999).
Control of a car-like mobile robot for parking problem.
InProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation .
Detroit, Michigan, USA.
Lo, Y.K., Rad, A.B., Wong, C.W., and Ho, M.L. (2003).
Automatic parallel parking. In Proc. IEEE Conf. Intel-
ligent Transportation Systems . Shanghai, China.
Paromtchik, I.E., Garnier, P., and Laugier, C. (1997).
Autonomous maneuvers of a nonhonolomic vehcicle.
InProc. of the Int. Symp. on Experimental Robotics .
Barcelona, Spain.
Reeds, J.A. and Shepp, R.A. (1990). Optmal paths for
a car that goes both forwards and backwards. Pacic
Journal of Mathematics , 145(2), 367{393.
Zhao, Y. and Collins, E.G. (2005). Robust automatic
parallel parking in tight spaces via fuzzy logic. Robotics
and Autonomous Systems , 51(2-3).CTS 2012
September 12-14, 2012. Sofia, Bulgaria
42